The Joe Rogan experience. Yeah. First of all,
look how good you look in there on the cover there. Handsome bastard.
Look at ya. Looking good there. What year is that from.
1968 November. I just come off the last mission in Vietnam. Wow.
It was on a Hilltop. We got stuck in the rain in the Asheville valley.
It was the first cavalry. And, uh, we really,
the helicopters couldn't get in for 11 days. It was awful. Wow.
We had leaches everywhere. Oh. And the enemy, we didn't know where they were,
but we felt that they were going to close in. I was,
but it was too wet ultimately for them to close in, but they knew we were there.
So we were praying the whole time was kind of nerve wracking because it was my
last few days. You understand? I was supposed to get out of there with DeRosa,
leave the country. I was due out. Uh, I had volunteered.
I had volunteered for an extra three months in order to get out of the army
three months sooner. In other words, they had there. Normally you have to serve,
uh, if a two year deal you had to serve six,
six months stateside on the backside of it. So, uh,
I didn't want to do that cause I was going nuts with the rules and the
regulations, and I'd gotten into some trouble with that.
So I extended in combat for another three months.
And that ended up in this mission.
How much did your time serving impact your,
your directing and you you've had these life experiences as someone who's just a
filmmaker. They really can't draw upon,
like you you've had actual combat experience.
And when you're making movies about combat, I mean,
that has to be a gigantic advantage or at least it
adds layers to it that are almost impossible to create, to recreate for someone.
Who's just trying to imagine what it's like.
Yeah. And that was very important when we did platoon, uh,
I w I was trying to get the exact distances
and what, and the amount of firepower is not as huge. It's not as intense,
generally speaking as the movies make it. Yeah.
And that's the problem because the movies have so much to play, you know,
so much to show they bring the enemy much closer. They,
they condense things and they,
they amplify as much as possible. Now I did that too here and there. So I'm,
I'm guilty too, but I think overall it's way over done. And, uh,
the newer stuff that's come out since 2001, you know,
with the patriotic stuff and the heavily, heavily militaristic stuff is way off,
way off. And, uh, people don't die that way. Like, you know, in the,
uh, type of films like mark Walberg made, or, you know, those kinds of films,
they just way, way over done anyway, went in one way or like,
well, uh, what was the name of the lone survivor? Was it the name of it? Yeah.
They get dropped off whatever. And 10 guys,
and they managed to kill how many Taliban for each guy, you know, much of.
That was based on, I mean, it's all about Marcus Luttrell.
I haven't had a chance to talk to Marcus. I'm a friends with him,
but I don't know how much of it, they,
they monkey with everything whenever they make it. Well.
We're done. It was way over done.
And that what I heard and what's been reported is that they, you know,
they got trapped right away. That was pretty quick.
And the ambush went on and they, and they got,
they got the kicked out of themselves. And, uh, you know, I can't, I can't be,
I don't remember exactly the details,
but he did get away and some people did scam,
but it doesn't look like it does in the movie where one's.
A hero. Right. That is a problem.
And that's one of the things that I really loved about platoon. Everyone.
Wasn't a hero. I mean, the Tom Berenger character.
The I existed. It's in the book. Yeah. It's based on a guy called Sergeant.
Well, I called him Sergeant Barnes, but he hadn't, I wouldn't use his real name,
real guy gunshot in the face.
And it was a scarred distorted kind of handsome like
that, but he was a serious guy and he knew what he was doing.
He was the leader of the platoon. See,
I made clear that the leaders of the platoon were not really the lieutenants.
They were this, the platoon Sergeant and this and the squad sergeants.
And they were very important in our lives. So I rarely saw officers.
I was dealing in the jungle. You deal with what's right in front of you.
So the Sergeant was crucial. Barnes is a crucial character.
So is the other character Sergeant Elias played by William Defoe was the,
in another unit that I had combined four different units.
I was in three combat units. I combined them into one, one unit,
one platoon for this movie purposes.
So the Willem Defoe character was also based on a real person. Yeah. Yes.
He was. He was based on a guy I'm in the loops, long range, recon patrol,
who was a great guy. He was an patchy kind of an Apache Mexican, uh,
mix, uh, uh, not quite sure what he was,
cause I didn't get to know him that well,
but I admired him because he had that life grace.
So a guy who fought a lot, he'd been around, he'd been in,
he'd been in before he was on a second tour and a very much a love,
a beloved figure. And he was killed after I left the unit.
Uh, he was killed about a month later in a friendly fire accident.
Now friendly fire is met. We talk about it in the book quite a bit, you know,
because it's also underestimated people, never, the Pentagon cuts it all out.
And especially in the movies that come from the Pentagon approval, they, they,
they don't like to emphasize how difficult,
how often I would say 15 to 20% of our casualties in that
war were friendly fire. Wow.
Now that's not just ground fire from when you get into a jungle situation,
you're close to people. You don't really know where you're shooting.
Sometimes you don't know where the sh where the incoming fire is,
is coming from. So it's quite a mess. It's chaotic the radio people,
screaming, shouting, noise, confusion, and a lot of fear.
Yeah. That was highlighted for us.
When the pat Tillman incident happened, very important. One pat Tillman,
who is this spectacular athlete,
decided to postpone his NFL career and go over and serve and was
killed in friendly fire. And it wasn't really reported that way for awhile.
That's absolutely correct. Which is the point is that they don't,
they really don't want the parents to know what's really going on. So if,
imagine if imagine 15,
maybe 20% are dying from that friendly fire and that this is
not just ground fire. This is of course bombing and certainly artillery fire,
because that is often this placed.
It's not that easy to get the coordinates down in a tense situation where you,
you can hit your, where artillery 20 miles away, 40 miles away.
It has to hit, you has to hit the spot.
Right when you're making a movie like platoon. And this is in many, much,
much of it is based on your actual real life experience,
how much preparation is involved in it, and how much,
how much is it different than when you're making another movie?
Because this is something that's intensely personal to you, obviously.
Yeah. Uh, how much preparation? Well,
I got, I got a great combat advisor. He'd been there as a Marine Dale dye.
Uh, he came in out of the blue and, uh, he, he was a real, a lifer type.
So he remembered all the details of uniforms and, uh,
fire and the, and, uh, the firepower. I mean, it's,
it took a lot of details to put this together. Uh, but the preparation was,
I'd been doing it for 10 years. I started the picture in 1976. I wrote it.
I wrote it. It wasn't made, it was rejected by the,
by the powers that be the first time. And then it was, uh,
it was considered great, great script, but to re you know, too realistic,
a bummer, a downer,
if you remember back in the seventies and apocalypse now and deer hunter. Yeah.
Those were big films and mythic beautiful films, but they were not realistic.
Then they had, uh, Sylvester Stallone to his, uh,
Rambo series where he goes back and fights the war. Again,
those drive you crazy. Yeah. Although the first one was pretty good. Uh,
but the first one was different. They're playing up the, you know,
the whole sympathy card, the pity card. I don't buy that. You know,
that there's a lot of that veteran feeling that, you know, we were,
we were, we were beaten.
We had our hands tied behind our backs and we couldn't win.
And that kind of thing believe me, uh,
it was a badly conceived war with a lot of misinformation.
I go on in the book and talk about the lies that were spread by the military,
the propaganda that were winning the whole time they were using the body counts,
heavy body counts. And they'd say, well, if we're killing so much,
so many of them, they're not going to be that many left. And,
but on the other hand, as the years went on, more, more of them kept appearing.
So they, the Vietnamese were indestructible in a way. They were like aunts.
They were, they were fighting for their independence, their, for their land man.
It was their country. And, uh, they never gave up ever.
And then you could have nuked them.
And that's what Curtis LeMay at one point suggested you could have dropped a
nuclear bomb.
It wouldn't have done it wouldn't have made the difference that God they didn't.
But, uh, America went to extremes to win that war with poisoning,
the bombing, the bombing of not only Vietnam,
Laos and Cambodia was intense, intense, bigger, bigger than by far,
then world war two for this crazy war.
Well, it also,
it set a precedent for our lack of trust in the military and lack of
trust in the government that guides the military,
particularly in how they deal with the veterans that are dealing with things
like agent orange or, you know,
people that have come back that were sick,
where they denied that this was part of the problem. Sure.
We didn't even have PTSD. We didn't, we didn't know what that was,
but it started prop up when I got back. And I talk about it here,
a bit about PTSD, which I'd never heard of, but I think we all have.
What did they call it back then? Just shellshocked or.
Yeah. So, but I wasn't,
it was not an diagnostic diagnosable ma it was not an
ailment that you could officially, uh,
catalog because if you did,
the army would be admitting to a huge amount of insurance problems and all kinds
of medical problems they would have to cover. So it was, you know,
it was something that there was no word for it, but frankly,
uh,
to get back to the issue of w the original question was H the platoon was
rejected on for these two. It almost came to be again in 1983,
a fellow party. Again, it's a heartbreaking story. It's in the book. And,
uh, uh, it's resurrected. I mean, I forget about,
I just put it in the closet. After those movies came out,
I said that they don't want to know about Vietnam and it, in this country,
they really forget it. It's not going to happen. Fine. I live with it.
I was moving on with my career. I had midnight express. I had Scarface. I,
I was, uh, I had other things in my life, but, uh,
Michael Cimino who had directed the deer,
hunter told me he wanted to produce it with me as the writer,
as a director. And that, uh, we would, he would,
we would resurrect it because he said, Vietnam is coming back. I said,
that's nonsense. I don't think it's kind of come back. He said,
look at Stanley Kubrick's pictures. He's going to make a picture.
It's called a full metal jacket. And, uh, it took,
it took three years or two years for him to make it. But the fact that,
that he made it certainly gave us some impetus to make,
we made it very low budget. And by the way,
it was made by the same company as main Salvador, my previous film,
they made him, I made him back to back in Mexico and the Philippines, uh,
back-to-back financed very low budget by Hemdale.
A British company led by a gentleman named John Daley, who I met,
who was my mentor and much credit name in the book. So,
uh, we were nothing filming out of nowhere. I mean, we were the bottom. I mean,
we're in the Philippines in making a film that nobody really knew much about.
And at the bottom, you know, we were struggling to get it made.
And there was a weather problems. There was all kinds of
logistical problems, but we'd been through hell on Salvador,
as I describe in the book in Mexico. So we were a unit by this time, we,
we got used to the difficulties of making low budget films.
In between the time you wrote it. And the time it actually got done,
was there ever any effort by the studios to try to water it down or to try to
doctor it up? And.
Sure, now that went on quite a bit, uh,
everyone read the script at one point or another everyone going to rejected it.
So, and when I finally almost got made with Chimino in 1983,
uh, we thought we were in, we thought we'd get it made now. But, uh,
the, uh,
the resistance to it at the very end with the MGM was supposed to be the
distributor. And Henry Kissinger was on the board of directors along with, uh,
Hague Alexander. Hey, do you remember him?
Military guy who was secretary of state? Very bad tempered though.
They were both on the board and whether they went to that board, I don't know,
but that's what the story,
they cover their by telling me we can't make this movie.
We can't distribute this movie because the board would be against it. Now,
sometimes they say, they tell you that without checking, but in this case,
I don't know. So as a result, the film fell apart again,
this was a hard, did you ever.
Think, like maybe I can move it a little bit or change it a little bit,
or would you just stand.
Up the Pentagon said to me, forget it. We're not going to help you at all.
And this thing is completely distorted.
They were upset as hell about the fragging. I mean,
that's to say dragging is yeah. Yeah. There was a lot of that towards the end.
It started in 67 8,
but there was more and more discontent when Lyndon Johnson pulled out of the
presidency in March of 68. That was a big moment. I think all the souls,
everyone kind of knew that this thing was not going to work out and who wanted
to be the last guy to get killed in Vietnam. Right.
And so I think 69 70 were more and more fractions,
more fractions, fractious, and there was more and more incidents. At one point,
there was a Pentagon document that came out.
I've seen it that said this situation in the army is getting so
poor, so bad. The morale is so low that it's,
it resemble is beginning to resemble the French mutinies in 1917 in the
world war one, that was a big concern of the Pentagon.
They knew the thing was not going to work. It was cracking from within. So we,
we gave more and more, let's say more and more,
uh, credit to the Vietnamese, south Vietnamese,
and saying that they were going to take our place.
We're going to put more money. We put a fortune into them,
south Vietnamese army, like we're doing now or the African army.
Yeah. It's interesting. When you look back, what year did platoon come out?
I finally made it out in 86. Remember when, when you really think about it,
you're only talk,
you're not talking about that much distance distance between that movie coming
out and the Vietnam war ending. I mean,
in terms of how we look at the world now, I mean, if we look at it's 2020,
if we look at 2000, that doesn't seem like 2003,
that doesn't seem that long ago,
but that's kind of the timeline you're looking at. And so in a lot of ways,
it was probably very fresh in a lot of people's eyes,
particularly people in the Pentagon.
It was quite something when it came out, it was, uh, it was, uh,
it was like a bomb went off, went around the world. First of all,
it wasn't just America.
This film played everywhere and was,
I guess it was a shock at the time because it was more realistic than any
Warfield that they had seen. And of course it was dirty. And,
you know, I mean, it was, we had drug use in it, which was, you know,
the description of the division. There was a division in the, uh, army.
We were, we were draftees many of us, so it wasn't all volunteer, you know,
and it wasn't all like gung-ho at all. It was a split.
Uh, I just, I D I described, I showed this split as much as I could.
Uh, I would be in the,
I joined the camp where the people who I would say were anti
authoritarian.
I wouldn't say they were anti-war because we didn't have anything like that
going on. You know, it was just the army sucks. The man sucks. You know,
a lot of the black troops knew this.
So there was a lot of dissension with the black troops too.
Cause when Martin Luther king got killed in April of 68, that had,
that had a negative impact over there.
So it was a lot going on in the country and people were seen feeling it.
And, uh, new,
new troops were coming in all the time from the country draft teams. So we were,
you know, you get a feeling for what's going on.
The Mo did the movies feel different to you than anything else you've ever done
in terms of your obligation?
Because I really do think that that was the most realistic at that
point, for sure war movie ever made.
And the one that left people with the most conflicted feelings
and just this,
this feeling of as much as you can relay it in a film with notable
actors that you, you,
you showed the horrors of war in a way that I don't think had ever been
portrayed before film.
When we got the details, right? I mean,
when you see a dead body and you'll see it being lifted into a helicopter,
that's really, it looks like a dead man and the pain of death. I mean,
you feel the danger. It's,
it's never what you think it's going to be. It's always comes up in another way.
It's like sloppy sometimes and battle.
And that's why I don't like about a lot of the movies.
Battle is often just confusion, breaking down things don't work.
It's like Mike Tyson said, you know,
your plan goes out the window and you get hit in the face.
It's that's the way it goes.
It never see the Americans had a methodical way of doing it.
We will, we go into the jungle. We send, uh, the little guys into the jungle,
they meet resistance, pull back bomb, artillery, do anything,
take minimum casualties. That's not what the Marines did,
but that's what the Army's idea was. And that it works to a degree,
but it eradicates the hole that the bombing is,
is very sloppy. And not only do you have friendly fire,
but you have a lot of civilians killed too.
Imagine when you finish a final cut of that movie and it got real,
it had to be a very strange, almost like you're,
you're releasing a child and you're you're you, I mean, it was,
it had to have been so much more personal and so much, so much more. Yeah.
I'd been through so much. I really, I didn't, I, I didn't think it was good.
I thought it was a good movie. I thought it was a good script.
I didn't think I didn't expect anything. I had just done Salvador,
which was about a dirty civil war down in the, in the central America,
in which America, again, supported some pretty bad guys, some desk squads.
And I showed that and that picture had not done very well because it had been,
America had been very little,
no interest really in the central American issues of the 1980s to remember the
Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua,
there was a lot of turmoil and Guatemala turmoil in Honduras,
where I went down there to research Salvador.
And what I saw in Honduras was the beginning of another Vietnam.
That's one of the reasons I really committed to Salvador heavily.
When I saw the troops, the American troops. Now there were women, men and women,
uh, young in uniform, many of them, national guard, troops reserves,
they were there building up for this.
I think it was pretty clear that Reagan was going to attack Nicaragua in some
way, but it never happened because of a fortuitous accident. When the
CIA got busted for flying a cargo cargo over
Nicaragua. And it was a huge scandal that led to the Iran,
Contra unraveling with Reagan.
So Reagan was unable to do what he wanted to do in, uh, in,
uh, Nicaragua. Although we had mined the port, we'd done everything possible,
supporting the contrast, all that me off. In other words,
it was like 20 years after the war, 15 years after the war here,
I am back in central America. I'm seeing the same thing,
young guys like me in a country yet. Uh,
you know, just believing what they're hearing from their superiors.
So you felt like this obligation to not just release Salvador,
but also release platoon as in platoon,
your experiences showing what the Vietnam war was really like.
And with Salvador saying, Hey, this is happening again.
Yeah, I did them simultaneously, except I didn't really believe,
I didn't believe platoon was going to work come out.
So I didn't have much faith in it.
It did come out. How much of a surprise was it when it was a giant hit? Well,
I knew that.
In the moment, put it this way, the shooting was,
you can tell from the young people, the actors and the,
their enthusiasm for this, they, there was a hunger, uh, to me,
they were so delighted, delighted to become so,
so soldiers for the purposes of the movie,
we trained them on a 24 hour basis for two weeks. And it was an eight worked.
I wanted them to get no sleep. And Dale dye helped me with that week.
We put them in a bivouac training situation, but a real one, I mean,
where you don't sleep and you, you basically pulling century duty all night,
kind of you have you split your duty with foxholes three guys and Dale would
stage attacks and stuff in the middle of the night,
they were nervous and they were, they were tired beyond belief, which is good.
That's where you want. So how did.
How did you plan this out? So when you were,
when you were about to start filming, you had it in your head,
we have to make this more realistic. What's the best way to do it.
From the beginning, from the beginning of the way I cast it, I wanted the,
I wanted young people as much as possible in the, in the roles,
people who were fresh, who didn't look like they'd done other movies, right.
And types. They were based on everybody. I knew in my platoon,
people from the south, a lot of people from the south,
the people from the Midwest, a lot of, uh, inner city people, uh,
Chicago, especially, uh, St. Louis, new Orleans,
um, and, uh, you know, Californians.
And I try to mix it all up.
But the whole idea from the beginning was that we're gonna make this with our
little bit of money. We're going to make this as realistic as we could.
So we planned it that way. And we, the camp worked,
we got the full cooperation of the Philippine army and some helicopters that
they had, but very dangerous ones. But at least that was w all right.
Had that ever been done before the camp that the idea of having them?
I don't think so. Cause that has bothered me a lot in the field,
maybe in the oldest, but I don't, I don't know a one. No. What.
What made you fall on that? Like what, why was that? Well, I've lived, it.
I've lived it, so I wanted them to above all. I wanted them to be tired,
irritable. It gives you a sense of what it's like in it. There's bugs,
there's heat. It's, it's a jungle. And, uh, it's uh,
how do they respond to that? At first, there were a lot of.
There was a sag sag, the sad, sad union send you,
you have to have 12 hour turnaround. So a few of them quit. Really? Yeah. Wow.
And we replaced them.
I had a long list waiting list of people that I'd seen over the years. Wow.
I actually,
Charlie sheen was the younger brother of Emil Emilio Estevez,
who was my first choice to play it in 1983. And after the movie went,
peeled back to 86, uh,
Emilio had gotten older and I went with Charlie who came of age about that time
was my age when I was over there. Oh, wow. So he was 1920.
So, you know, that's what I w I wanted those faces. Once you get the faces,
you can train them. And, uh,
Berenger and Defoe were the oldest and they, that helped enormously. They,
they were this, you know, anchors of, of the operation.
When the film was this gigantic success that did that.
How did that feel to you? Did that validate this idea that you had and.
Shocked me. It shocked me. I mean, for years, has it been rejected 10 years?
You know, I mean, I was sick of it. I was saying,
I'm not going to make this movie because it's going to go wrong. You know,
I didn't think it was possible, but because of this, you know,
Kubrick picture and the support of the English company, uh, John Daley, they,
they wanted to make it.
This is news for me because all my life I'm fighting to make against somebody's
wishes. All of a sudden I got some people on my side, that's a big,
that's a big difference.
And the enthusiasm of the cast and Dale dye and all these great people
and my camera, man, everybody, they loved it. And, uh, we made it and frankly,
we finished it. We did it on budget. And 50 was 50 days. We went 54 days,
but that was in, we had the money in the, uh, in the, in the,
that 10% contingency. We finished it in 54 days and it was tough.
Uh, and we got out of there just in time because the pontoons came and
in the editing right away,
you could feel that people were reacting to it in a different way. We edited it.
There was no, we, we, we edited a little bit, but you know,
we played with it playing with it. You massage it. But right away,
I would say from the first screening on, you could tell,
people were responding to saying, this is real. This is, I've never seen this.
This is real. So it, it took care of itself in a way. I mean,
they didn't put much money in the distributing company was Orion pictures
existed that they, they put, uh, they said, well, give it a quality release,
a few theaters at Christmas in 86.
And it opened huge first day in New York. Uh, there was a line of veterans,
young meat, you know, veterans who were look young. I mean, not world war II,
enters young veterans. They were around the block at the Loews Astor.
And I wasn't there, but people who told me that they were,
they went in quietly, there was a mute mute,
and they sat through the film and very little talk, very little, anything,
not a lot of the gung-ho stuff you hear. And at the end of it,
they were quiet and they, some of them wouldn't get up out of their,
quite a few of them were sitting there, still in their seats, you know,
somewhere crying. He took off. Uh, and then it took off. Like, I can't,
I've never, you know,
it's a phenomenon you rarely see in the world is like the top third,
highest grossing film in America that year. And it was,
it was a blockbuster because no children are allowed in, you know,
and you don't have much of a woman's audience at first,
so you don't figure on these things, you know, uh, it,
it took off and kept going.
And then the women started to come in and the third week,
as it was getting more and more talked about, there was no stopping it. Okay.